Mild Cognitive Impairment or Mild Dementia management

Assessment:

- Cognitive screening tools exist specifically for the early identification of Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), like the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA). 

- For patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), clinicians should assess for the presence of functional impairment related to cognition before giving a diagnosis of dementia and a medical evaluation for MCI risk factors that are potentially modifiable.

- A careful sleep history, including assessment of sleep time, insomnia, daytime sleepiness, napping, and REM sleep behavior disorder may facilitate identification of pre-clinical dementia, or high risk of developing dementia, and should be included in the assessments.

- There is strong evidence that slower gait speed is associated with future dementia, in population studies. When slower gait speed (cut-off gait speed below 0.8m/s) is coupled with cognitive impairment (subjective or objective) the risk is higher. We recommend testing gait speed in clinics in those patients with MCI or mild dementia.

- Assess for vascular risk factors, and manage them as prevention of cerebrovascular pathology, that may impact on the progression of dementia.

- When using assessment scales to determine the severity of Alzheimer's disease, healthcare professionals should take into account any physical, sensory or learning disabilities, or communication difficulties that could affect the results and make any adjustments they consider appropriate. 

- If a personality, behavior or mood change has been observed, an objective assessment of the behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia should be carried out with the patient and a family member using the short version of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, Mild Behavioral Impairment Checklist. If a mood change has been observed an objective assessment should be carried out with the Patient Health Questionnaire-9.

Diagnosis: 

If the diagnosis is uncertain and Alzheimer's disease is suspected, consider carrying out FDG-PET (fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography- Computed Tomography).  if FDG-PET is unavailable Perfusion SPECT (Single-Photon Emission Computed Tomography) can be carried out. Alternative diagnostics tests include examining cerebrospinal fluid for either total tau or total tau and phosphorylated-tau and either amyloid Beta 1-42 or amyloid Beta 1-42, and amyloid Beta 1-40. If a diagnosis cannot be made after one of these tests, consider using the other one. Do not use Apolipoprotein E genotyping or electroencephalography to diagnose Alzheimer's disease. 

Management:

For the patient diagnosed with Alzheimer's diseases, when assessing the severity of Alzheimer's disease and the need for treatment, healthcare professionals should not rely solely on cognition scores in circumstances in which it would be inappropriate to do so. Before starting non-pharmacological or pharmacological treatment for distress in people living with dementia, conduct a structured assessment to explore possible reasons for their distress and check for and address clinical or environmental causes (for example pain, infections, delirium or inappropriate care). Identify events (e.g. shopping at busy market) or factors (e.g. going out alone) that may precede, trigger, or enhance problem behaviors. Modify these triggers if possible.

General Recommendations:

Ask older adults with MCI or mild dementia whether they wish to know the diagnosis and with whom it should be shared. Tailor the explanation of the illness so that they can understand and retain the information, and give basic information like "dementia is an illness of the brain and tends to get worse over time", "although there is no cure, there is much that can be done to help and support the person and the family", or "many specific concerns and behaviours can be managed as they arise".

Ensure that older adults with MCI or mild dementia and family members or carers (as appropriate) have access to a memory service or equivalent hospital or primary-care-based multidisciplinary dementia service.

For older adults with MCI or mild dementia, plan for activities of daily life (ADL) in a way that maximises independent activity, enhances function, helps to adapt and develop skills, and minimises the need for support. Facilitate functioning and participation in the community involving people and their carers in planning and implementation of these interventions. Assist in liaison with available social resources. Advise recreational activities tailored to severity of cognitive impairment. Refer for occupational therapy, if available.

Keep the environment at home safe for older adults with MCI or mild dementia to reduce the risk of falling and injury.

In older adults with MCI, recommend cognitive interventions when considered. Assess behavioural and neuropsychiatric symptoms in MCI and mild dementia and treat with both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic approaches when indicated. As initial and ongoing management, offer psychosocial and environmental interventions to reduce distress in people living with MCI or dementia.

Encourage carers to improve cognitive functioning of older adults with mild dementia using interventions like providing regular orientation information, use of materials such as newspapers, radio, or TV programmes, family albums and household items to promote communication, to orient them to current events, to stimulate memories, and to enable people to share and value their experiences. Use simple short sentences to make verbal communication clear. Try to minimize competing noises, such as radio, TV, or other conversation. Listen carefully to what the person has to say. Keep things simple, avoid changes to routine, and, as far as possible, avoid exposing the person to unfamiliar and bewildering places. Do not try to train cognitive capacity by, for example, confronting the patient with calculating or memorizing exercises, because it causes stress and therefore worthens the situation.

In multimorbid older adults with MCI or mild dementia, and behavioural and neuropsychiatric symptoms, consider environmental adaptations such as appropriate seating, safe wandering areas, signs (e.g. 'no exit' sign on the street door or signpost to toilet). Encourage soothing, calming, or distracting strategies. Suggest an activity the person enjoys (e.g. going for a walk, listening to music, engaging in conversation), especially when feeling agitated.

Ensure that older adults living with MCI or mild dementia have access to psychosocial and environmental interventions for distress when having behavioral and neuropsychiatric symptoms.

For older adults living with MCI or mild dementia who have sleep problems, consider a personalized multicomponent sleep management approach that includes sleep hygiene education, exposure to daylight, exercise and personalized activities.

For the carers of older adults living with MCI or mild dementia, assess the impact on the carer and the carer's needs to ensure necessary support and resources for their family life, employment, social activities, and health. When people living with dementia or their carers have a primary care appointment, assess for any emerging dementia-related needs and ask them if they need any more support. Encourage the carers to seek help if they are experiencing difficulty or strain in caring for their loved one. Provide information to the carer regarding dementia, keeping in mind the wishes of the person with dementia. Provide training and support in specific skills, e.g. managing difficult behaviour, if necessary. To be most effective, elicit active participation, e.g. role play. Consider providing practical support when feasible, e.g. home-based respite care. Explore whether the person qualifies for any disability benefits or other social/financial support (government or non-governmental). 

For patients with MCI, clinicians should perform serial assessments over time to monitor for changes in cognitive status. Tracking response to treatment and change over time should be individualized and requires a multi-dimensional approach. It should not rely on a single tool or clinical domain and requires caregiver or reliable informant input. Clinical response should be based on the assessment of the following clinical domains: cognition, functional autonomy, behaviour, as well as caregiver burden. The frequency of clinical visits depends on the individual patients and circumstances but typically varies between 6 to 12 months. Patients with behavioural symptoms of dementia may need more frequent reassessment. Not all domains need to be assessed at every visit, but all domains must be evaluated at least annually.

Pharmacological Recommendations:

Wean older adults with MCI or mild dementia from medications that can contribute to cognitive impairment (where feasible and medically appropriate) and treat modifiable risk factors that may be contributing. Consider discontinuation of opioids in multimorbid older adults with mild dementia in whom there are no signs or symptoms of pain or no clear indication, or suspicion of side effects.

Counsel the patients with MCI or mild dementia and their families that there are no pharmacologic or dietary agents currently shown to have symptomatic cognitive benefit in MCI and may choose not to offer acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors. If clinicians choose to offer cholinesterase inhibitors, they must first discuss with patients the fact that this is an off-label prescription not currently backed by empirical evidence.

The three AChE inhibitors donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine as monotherapies are recommended as options for managing mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease. Memantine monotherapy is recommended only as an option for managing Alzheimer's disease for people with moderate Alzheimer's disease who are intolerant of or have a contraindication to AChE inhibitors or severe Alzheimer's disease. Prescribers should only start treatment with AChE inhibitors or memantine on the advice of a clinician who has the necessary knowledge and skills. If prescribing an AChE inhibitor, treatment should normally be started with the drug with the lowest acquisition cost. However, an alternative AChE inhibitor could be prescribed if it is considered appropriate when taking into account adverse event profile, expectations about adherence, medical comorbidity, possibility of drug interactions and dosing profiles.

Do not stop AChE inhibitors in people with Alzheimer's disease because of disease severity alone.

In older adults with MCI or mild dementia with behavioural and neuropsychiatric symptoms, only offer antipsychotics when at risk of harming themselves or others or experiencing agitation, hallucinations or delusions that are causing them severe distress. When using antipsychotics, use the lowest effective dose and use them for the shortest possible time. Except in cases of delirium, avoid haloperidol and use risperidone or quetiapine. Reassess the person at least every 6 weeks, to check whether they still need medication. Monitor the person for extrapyramidal symptoms. Stop treatment with antipsychotics if the person is not getting a clear ongoing benefit from taking them and after discussion with the person taking them and their family members or carers (as appropriate).

Do not offer valproate or diazepam to manage agitation or aggression in people living with dementia, unless it is indicated for another condition.

Do not routinely offer antidepressants to manage mild to moderate depression in people living with MCI or mild dementia, unless they are indicated for a pre-existing severe mental health problem.

Do not offer melatonin to manage insomnia in people living with Alzheimer's disease.
